README.md, before:

[![CircleCI](https://circleci.com/gh/rchillyard/TableParser.svg?style=svg)](https://circleci.com/gh/rchillyard/TableParser)

# TableParser
A functional parser of tables implemented in Scala.
Typically, the input is in the form of a "CSV" (comma-separated-values) file.
But other formats are perfectly possible to parse.

Introduction
============

_TableParser_ aims to make it as simple as possible to ingest a fully-typed dataset.
The principal mechanism for this is the use of case classes to specify the types of fields in the dataset.
All conversions from strings to standard types are performed automatically.
For non-standard types, it suffices simple to provide an implicit converter of the form _String=>T_.
 
This library makes extensive use of type classes and other implicit mechanisms.
Indeed, it is implemented very similarly to JSON readers.
There is a row-parser configuration mechanism which allows
the programmer to vary the regular expressions for recognizing
strings and delimiters, also to vary the quote character.

User Guide
==========

Current version: 1.0.0.

The _Table_ trait expresses the result of parsing from a representation of a table.
Each row is represented by a parametric type _Row_.
Typically, this _Row_ type is a case class with one parameter corresponding to one column in the table file.
However, some table files will have too many columns to be practical for this correspondence.
It is normal, therefore, to group the columns together logically so that each parameter itself refers to
a class which extends _Product_ (i.e. a case class or tuple).

In general, a class hierarchy will model the columns of the table.
_TableParser_ will take care of any depth of case classes/tuples.
Currently, there is a limit of 12 parameters per case class/tuple so with a depth of _h_ classes/tuples you could
handle _12^h_ attributes altogether.

The names of the parameters of a case class do not necessarily have to be the same as the column from which the value derives.
The _ColumnHelper_ class is available to manage the mapping between parameters and columns.

The result of parsing a table file (CSV, etc.) will be a _Table[Row]_, wrapped in _Try_.
There are object methods to parse most forms of text: _File, Resource, InputStream, URL, Seq[String]_, etc. (see _Table_ below).

In order for _TableParser_ to know how to construct a case class (or tuple) from a set of values,
an implicit ionstance of _CellParser[T]_ must be in scope.
This is achieved via invoking a method (from object _Parsers_) of the following form:
where _f_ is a function which which takes _N_ parameters of types _P1, P2, ... Pn_ respectively,
and where _T_ is the type to be constructed:

    cellParserN[T,P1,P2,...Pn](f)
 
Typically, the function _f_ is the _apply_ method of the case class _T_,
although you may have to explicitly refer to a particular function/method with a specific signature.
When you have created a companion object to the case class, you will simply use the method name (typically _apply_) as in
_Name.apply_ (see example below).
If you have created additional apply methods, you will need to define a function similar
to the _fRating_ function (see example below).  

Note that _P1_, _P2_, ... _Pn_ each hava a context bound on _CellParser_ (that's to say, there is implicit
evidence of type _CellParser[P]_).
This is the mechanism which saves the programmer from having to specify explicit conversions.
_T_ is bound to be a subtype of _Product_ and has two context bounds: _ClassTag_ and _ColumnHelper_.

Table
=====

The _Table_ class has several methods for manipulation:
*  def iterator: Iterator[Row]
*  def rows: Seq[Row]
*  def maybeHeader: Option[Header]
*  def map[S](f: Row => S): Table[S]
*  def flatMap[U](f: Row => Table[U]): Table[U]
*  def unit[S](rows: Seq[S], maybeHeader: Option[Header]): Table[S]
*  def ++[U >: Row](table: Table[U]): Table[U]

It is to be expected that _join_ methods will be added later.

The following object methods are available for parsing text:
*  def parse[T: TableParser](ws: Seq[String]): Try[T]
*  def parse[T: TableParser](ws: Iterator[String]): Try[T]
*  def parse[T: TableParser](x: Source): Try[T]
*  def parse[T: TableParser](u: URI): Try[T]
*  def parse[T: TableParser](u: URL): Try[T]
*  def parse[T: TableParser](i: InputStream): Try[T]
*  def parse[T: TableParser](f: File): Try[T]
*  def parseResource[T: TableParser](s: String, clazz: Class[_] = getClass): Try[T]

Example
=======

In this example, we parse the IMDB Movie dataset from Kaggle.
The basic structure of the application code will look something like this:

        import MovieParser._
    
        val x: Try[Table[Movie]] = Table.parseResource("movie_metadata.csv")
     
In this example, the row type is _Movie_, a case class with eleven parameters.
The data can be found in a local resource (relative to this class) called movie_metadata.csv.
All of the (implicit) details that characterize this particular table input are provided
in the _MovieParser_ object.

The _Movie_ class looks like this:

    case class Movie(title: String, format: Format, production: Production, reviews: Reviews, director: Principal, actor1: Principal, actor2: Principal, actor3: Option[Principal], genres: AttributeSet, plotKeywords: AttributeSet, imdb: String)

Note that we make _actor3_ optional because some movies don't specify an "actor3".
Unlike with ordinary values such as _Int_, _Double_, we do have to add an additional implicit definition to accomplish this (see in example code below):
 
    implicit val optionalPrincipalParser: CellParser[Option[Principal]] = cellParserOption
 
The other case classes look like this:

    case class Format(color: String, language: String, aspectRatio: Double, duration: Int)
    case class Production(country: String, budget: Option[Int], gross: Int, titleYear: Int)
    case class Reviews(imdbScore: Double, facebookLikes: Int, contentRating: Rating, numUsersReview: Int, numUsersVoted: Int, numCriticReviews: Int, totalFacebookLikes: Int)
    case class Principal(name: Name, facebookLikes: Int)
    case class Name(first: String, middle: Option[String], last: String, suffix: Option[String])
    case class Rating(code: String, age: Option[Int])

The _MovieParser_ object looks like this:

    object MovieParser extends CellParsers {
      def camelCaseColumnNameMapper(w: String): String = w.replaceAll("([A-Z0-9])", "_$1")
      implicit val movieColumnHelper: ColumnHelper[Movie] = columnHelper(camelCaseColumnNameMapper _,
        "title" -> "movie_title",
        "imdb" -> "movie_imdb_link")
      implicit val reviewsColumnHelper: ColumnHelper[Reviews] = columnHelper(camelCaseColumnNameMapper _,
        "facebookLikes" -> "movie_facebook_likes",
        "numUsersReview" -> "num_user_for_reviews",
        "numUsersVoted" -> "num_voted_users",
        "numCriticReviews" -> "num_critic_for_reviews",
        "totalFacebookLikes" -> "cast_total_facebook_likes")
      implicit val ratingColumnHelper: ColumnHelper[Rating] = columnHelper()
      implicit val formatColumnHelper: ColumnHelper[Format] = columnHelper(camelCaseColumnNameMapper _)
      implicit val productionColumnHelper: ColumnHelper[Production] = columnHelper(camelCaseColumnNameMapper _)
      implicit val principalColumnHelper: ColumnHelper[Principal] = columnHelper(camelCaseColumnNameMapper _, Some("$x_$c"))
      implicit val attributeSetColumnHelper: ColumnHelper[AttributeSet] = columnHelper()
      val fRating: String => Rating = Rating.apply
      implicit val ratingParser: CellParser[Rating] = cellParser(fRating)
      implicit val formatParser: CellParser[Format] = cellParser4(Format)
      implicit val productionParser: CellParser[Production] = cellParser4(Production)
      implicit val nameParser: CellParser[Name] = cellParser(Name.apply)
      implicit val principalParser: CellParser[Principal] = cellParser2(Principal)
      implicit val reviewsParser: CellParser[Reviews] = cellParser7(Reviews)
      val fAttributes: String => AttributeSet = AttributeSet.apply
      implicit val attributesParser: CellParser[AttributeSet] = cellParser(fAttributes)
      implicit val optionalPrincipalParser: CellParser[Option[Principal]] = cellParserOption
      implicit val movieParser: CellParser[Movie] = cellParser11(Movie)
      implicit object MovieConfig extends DefaultRowConfig {
        override val string: Regex = """[^,]*""".r
        override val delimiter: Regex = """,""".r
        override val listEnclosure: String = ""
      }
      implicit val parser: StandardRowParser[Movie] = StandardRowParser[Movie]
      implicit object MovieTableParser extends TableParser[Table[Movie]] {
        type Row = Movie
        def hasHeader: Boolean = true
        override def forgiving: Boolean = true
        def rowParser: RowParser[Row] = implicitly[RowParser[Row]]
        def builder(rows: Seq[Row]): Table[Movie] = TableWithoutHeader(rows)
      }
    }

In this code,
_movieColumnHelper_, and the other columnHelpers, specify parameter-column mappings.

Note that _principalColumnHelper_ has an extra parameter at the start of the parameter list:
    
    Some("$x_$c")
    
which is an (optional) formatter for the purpose of prefixing a string to column names.
That's because there are several "Principal" parameters in a _Movie_, and each one has its own set of attributes. 
In this format parameter, "$x" is substituted by the prefix (the optional value passed into the lookup method)
while $c represents the translated column name.

Even when there is no name translation necessary, we still have to provide a columnHelper, as in:

    implicit val ratingColumnHelper: ColumnHelper[Rating] = columnHelper()

A couple of parameters of _Movie_ are actually attribute sets (_AttributeSet_).
These are basically lists of String within one column value.
Such lists are parsed as lists as they are parsed from the original strings and then returned as strings
in the form "{" element "," element ... "}"
The parsing from the original string obeys the _RowConfig_ parameters of _listSep_ and _listEnclosure_.

In this case, the row config object is defined as _MovieConfig_.
There, you also see the parameters _string_ which is a regular expression for a string in a table cell;
and _delimiter_ which is a regular expression which defines the separator between table columns;
and _quote_ the quote character which can be used to include cell values which enclose the separator.

A parameter can be optional, for example, in the _Movie_ example, the _Production_ class is defined thus:

    case class Production(country: String, budget: Option[Int], gross: Int, title_year: Int)
    
In this case, some of the movies do not have a budget provided.
All you have to do is declare it optional in the case class and _TableParser_ will specify it as _Some(x)_ if valid, else _None_.

Commit message:

Follow-up to fix of Issue #1
Updated CellParserSpec
Improved name parsing.
Some improvements to README

README.md, after:

[![CircleCI](https://circleci.com/gh/rchillyard/TableParser.svg?style=svg)](https://circleci.com/gh/rchillyard/TableParser)

# TableParser
A functional parser of tables implemented in Scala.
Typically, the input is in the form of a "CSV" (comma-separated-values) file.
But other formats are perfectly possible to parse.

Introduction
============

_TableParser_ aims to make it as simple as possible to ingest a fully-typed dataset.
The principal mechanism for this is the use of case classes to specify the types of fields in the dataset.
All conversions from strings to standard types are performed automatically.
For non-standard types, it suffices simple to provide an implicit converter of the form _String=>T_.
 
This library makes extensive use of type classes and other implicit mechanisms.
Indeed, it is implemented very similarly to JSON readers.
There is a row-parser configuration mechanism which allows
the programmer to vary the regular expressions for recognizing
strings and delimiters, also to vary the quote character.

User Guide
==========

Current version: 1.0.0.

The _Table_ trait expresses the result of parsing from a representation of a table.
Each row is represented by a parametric type _Row_.
Typically, this _Row_ type is a case class with one parameter corresponding to one column in the table file.
However, some table files will have too many columns to be practical for this correspondence.
It is normal, therefore, to group the columns together logically so that each parameter itself refers to
a class which extends _Product_ (i.e. a case class or tuple).

In general, a class hierarchy will model the columns of the table.
_TableParser_ will take care of any depth of case classes/tuples.
Currently, there is a limit of 12 parameters per case class/tuple so with a depth of _h_ classes/tuples you could
handle _12^h_ attributes altogether.

The names of the parameters of a case class do not necessarily have to be the same as the column from which the value derives.
The _ColumnHelper_ class is available to manage the mapping between parameters and columns.

The result of parsing a table file (CSV, etc.) will be a _Table[Row]_, wrapped in _Try_.
There are object methods to parse most forms of text: _File, Resource, InputStream, URL, Seq[String]_, etc. (see _Table_ below).

In order for _TableParser_ to know how to construct a case class (or tuple) from a set of values,
an implicit ionstance of _CellParser[T]_ must be in scope.
This is achieved via invoking a method (from object _Parsers_) of the following form:
where _f_ is a function which which takes _N_ parameters of types _P1, P2, ... Pn_ respectively,
and where _T_ is the type to be constructed:

    cellParserN[T,P1,P2,...Pn](f)
 
Typically, the function _f_ is the _apply_ method of the case class _T_,
although you may have to explicitly refer to a particular function/method with a specific signature.
When you have created a companion object to the case class, you will simply use the method name (typically _apply_) as in
_Name.apply_ (see example below).
If you have created additional apply methods, you will need to define a function of a specific type and pass that in.
Or, more simply, do as for _ratingParser_ in the example below.

Note that _P1_, _P2_, ... _Pn_ each hava a context bound on _CellParser_ (that's to say, there is implicit
evidence of type _CellParser[P]_).
This is the mechanism which saves the programmer from having to specify explicit conversions.
_T_ is bound to be a subtype of _Product_ and has two context bounds: _ClassTag_ and _ColumnHelper_.

Table
=====

The _Table_ class has several methods for manipulation:
*  def iterator: Iterator[Row]
*  def rows: Seq[Row]
*  def maybeHeader: Option[Header]
*  def map[S](f: Row => S): Table[S]
*  def flatMap[U](f: Row => Table[U]): Table[U]
*  def unit[S](rows: Seq[S], maybeHeader: Option[Header]): Table[S]
*  def ++[U >: Row](table: Table[U]): Table[U]

It is to be expected that _join_ methods will be added later.

The following object methods are available for parsing text:
*  def parse[T: TableParser](ws: Seq[String]): Try[T]
*  def parse[T: TableParser](ws: Iterator[String]): Try[T]
*  def parse[T: TableParser](x: Source): Try[T]
*  def parse[T: TableParser](u: URI): Try[T]
*  def parse[T: TableParser](u: URL): Try[T]
*  def parse[T: TableParser](i: InputStream): Try[T]
*  def parse[T: TableParser](f: File): Try[T]
*  def parseResource[T: TableParser](s: String, clazz: Class[_] = getClass): Try[T]

TableParser
===========

_TableParser_ is also the name of a trait which takes a parametric type called "Table" in its definition.
It is defined thus:

    trait TableParser[Table] {
      type Row
      def hasHeader: Boolean
      def forgiving: Boolean = false
      def rowParser: RowParser[Row]
      def builder(rows: Seq[Row]): Table
      def parse(ws: Seq[String]): Try[Table] = ...
}

The type _Row_ defines the specific row type (for example, _Movie_, in the example below).
_hasHeader_ is used to define if there is a header row in the first line of the file (or sequence of strings) to be parsed.
_forgiving_, which defaults to _false_, can be set to _true_ if you expect that some rows will not parse, but where this
will not invalidate your dataset as a whole.
In forgiving mode, any exceptions thrown in the parsing of a row are collected and then printed to _System.err_ at the conclusion of the parsing of the table.
_rowParser_ is the specific parser for the _Row_ type.
_builder_ is used by the _parse_ method.
_parse_ is the main method of _TableParser_ and takes a _Seq[String]_ and yields a _Try[Table]_.

Example
=======

In this example, we parse the IMDB Movie dataset from Kaggle.
The basic structure of the application code will look something like this:

        import MovieParser._
    
        val x: Try[Table[Movie]] = Table.parseResource("movie_metadata.csv")
     
In this example, the row type is _Movie_, a case class with eleven parameters.
The data can be found in a local resource (relative to this class) called movie_metadata.csv.
All of the (implicit) details that characterize this particular table input are provided
in the _MovieParser_ object.

The _Movie_ class looks like this:

    case class Movie(title: String, format: Format, production: Production, reviews: Reviews, director: Principal, actor1: Principal, actor2: Principal, actor3: Option[Principal], genres: AttributeSet, plotKeywords: AttributeSet, imdb: String)

Note that we make _actor3_ optional because some movies don't specify an "actor3".
Unlike with ordinary values such as _Int_, _Double_, we do have to add an additional implicit definition to accomplish this (see in example code below):
 
    implicit val optionalPrincipalParser: CellParser[Option[Principal]] = cellParserOption
 
The other case classes look like this:

    case class Format(color: String, language: String, aspectRatio: Double, duration: Int)
    case class Production(country: String, budget: Option[Int], gross: Int, titleYear: Int)
    case class Reviews(imdbScore: Double, facebookLikes: Int, contentRating: Rating, numUsersReview: Int, numUsersVoted: Int, numCriticReviews: Int, totalFacebookLikes: Int)
    case class Principal(name: Name, facebookLikes: Int)
    case class Name(first: String, middle: Option[String], last: String, suffix: Option[String])
    case class Rating(code: String, age: Option[Int])

The _MovieParser_ object looks like this:

    object MovieParser extends CellParsers {
      def camelCaseColumnNameMapper(w: String): String = w.replaceAll("([A-Z0-9])", "_$1")
      implicit val movieColumnHelper: ColumnHelper[Movie] = columnHelper(camelCaseColumnNameMapper _,
        "title" -> "movie_title",
        "imdb" -> "movie_imdb_link")
      implicit val reviewsColumnHelper: ColumnHelper[Reviews] = columnHelper(camelCaseColumnNameMapper _,
        "facebookLikes" -> "movie_facebook_likes",
        "numUsersReview" -> "num_user_for_reviews",
        "numUsersVoted" -> "num_voted_users",
        "numCriticReviews" -> "num_critic_for_reviews",
        "totalFacebookLikes" -> "cast_total_facebook_likes")
      implicit val ratingColumnHelper: ColumnHelper[Rating] = columnHelper()
      implicit val formatColumnHelper: ColumnHelper[Format] = columnHelper(camelCaseColumnNameMapper _)
      implicit val productionColumnHelper: ColumnHelper[Production] = columnHelper(camelCaseColumnNameMapper _)
      implicit val principalColumnHelper: ColumnHelper[Principal] = columnHelper(camelCaseColumnNameMapper _, Some("$x_$c"))
      implicit val attributeSetColumnHelper: ColumnHelper[AttributeSet] = columnHelper()
      implicit val ratingParser: CellParser[Rating] = cellParser(Rating.apply: String => Rating)
      implicit val formatParser: CellParser[Format] = cellParser4(Format)
      implicit val productionParser: CellParser[Production] = cellParser4(Production)
      implicit val nameParser: CellParser[Name] = cellParser(Name.apply)
      implicit val principalParser: CellParser[Principal] = cellParser2(Principal)
      implicit val reviewsParser: CellParser[Reviews] = cellParser7(Reviews)
      implicit val attributesParser: CellParser[AttributeSet] = cellParser(AttributeSet.apply: String => AttributeSet)
      implicit val optionalPrincipalParser: CellParser[Option[Principal]] = cellParserOption
      implicit val movieParser: CellParser[Movie] = cellParser11(Movie)
      implicit object MovieConfig extends DefaultRowConfig {
        override val string: Regex = """[^,]*""".r
        override val delimiter: Regex = """,""".r
        override val listEnclosure: String = ""
      }
      implicit val parser: StandardRowParser[Movie] = StandardRowParser[Movie]
      implicit object MovieTableParser extends TableParser[Table[Movie]] {
        type Row = Movie
        def hasHeader: Boolean = true
        override def forgiving: Boolean = true
        def rowParser: RowParser[Row] = implicitly[RowParser[Row]]
        def builder(rows: Seq[Row]): Table[Movie] = TableWithoutHeader(rows)
      }
    }

In this code,
_movieColumnHelper_, and the other columnHelpers, specify parameter-column mappings.

Note that _principalColumnHelper_ has an extra parameter at the start of the parameter list:
    
    Some("$x_$c")
    
which is an (optional) formatter for the purpose of prefixing a string to column names.
That's because there are several "Principal" parameters in a _Movie_, and each one has its own set of attributes. 
In this format parameter, "$x" is substituted by the prefix (the optional value passed into the lookup method)
while $c represents the translated column name.

Even when there is no name translation necessary, we still have to provide a columnHelper, as in:

    implicit val ratingColumnHelper: ColumnHelper[Rating] = columnHelper()

A couple of parameters of _Movie_ are actually attribute sets (_AttributeSet_).
These are basically lists of String within one column value.
Such lists are parsed as lists as they are parsed from the original strings and then returned as strings
in the form "{" element "," element ... "}"
The parsing from the original string obeys the _RowConfig_ parameters of _listSep_ and _listEnclosure_.

In this case, the row config object is defined as _MovieConfig_.
There, you also see the parameters _string_ which is a regular expression for a string in a table cell;
and _delimiter_ which is a regular expression which defines the separator between table columns;
and _quote_ the quote character which can be used to include cell values which enclose the separator.

A parameter can be optional, for example, in the _Movie_ example, the _Production_ class is defined thus:

    case class Production(country: String, budget: Option[Int], gross: Int, title_year: Int)
    
In this case, some of the movies do not have a budget provided.
All you have to do is declare it optional in the case class and _TableParser_ will specify it as _Some(x)_ if valid, else _None_.
